there was a song I used to hear all the
time as a kid these are the people in
your neighborhood
you may take it for granted that you
know the people in your neighborhood
that you have a sense of the
cross-section of the society or living
and or at the particular city or town
you're living in but you don't one of
the most powerful sources of bias for us
to overcome in the social sciences is
that bias of only paying attention to
people we find interesting maybe you
went to the grocery store today who do
you remember seeing at the grocery store
or who do you remember speaking to at
the grocery store if you spoke to a
couple of evil you will only remember
the people you found interesting and you
may not even be aware of it but you will
be avoiding looking at avoiding making
eye contact with and avoiding talking to
Murie at other people for myriad other
reasons including you find them ugly you
find them culturally alien shall we say
that there's some barrier between you
and them that makes you think or assume
they're just not the kind of person
you'd want to talk to using the app
tinder forces you to really see the
faces of the people in your neighborhood
in a survey even if you only look at
these people for one half of one second
before pressing the red X to say you're
not interested you are seeing who these
people are and perhaps not the lifestyle
they actually lead but the lifestyle
that they choose to present to you and
to present at the public with pride when
the reality is in our day to day lives
there were all kinds of people were
ignoring all the time I may not think
that the sample of society engaging with
is tremendously biased but where do I
actually spend my time
at the library specifically the
University Library we used to I mean the
gym I go do it's not a cross-section
Society at all people went to our old
gym here they weren't even average
amongst bodybuilders or athletes they
were really peculiar people at her gym
you know some of them professional
models some of them bodybuilding
competitors but like you look around
that gym these are not fit this is not
average people to say no and even if
there are average people going to my
grocery store I don't notice them that's
not who I talk to and I do I interact
with the one who makes an impression on
me where I don't even look in their
faces for that one half of a second that
you would on tinder and then beyond that
if you just think about the location of
the grocery store
of course there's bias even if we don't
mean to I mean think about how much more
I have in common with the other people
who choose to live in this apartment
building just just the the factors that
go into that so I should when we were at
the grocery store one of the women at
the checkout desk she asked about where
we were living and referred to it as a
very expensive place to live and I said
to her oh well actually this is how much
the rent is and she revealed she was you
know she was checking out the grocery
she were through she was paying more
rent than we do she lives out in the
suburbs right but there's a choice there
do you live downtown did you live in the
suburbs the different trade-offs the
advantage of disadvantages of that right
we want to live as pedestrians we don't
want to own a car we don't want to park
a car some people in the suburbs it the
opposite we're willing to tolerate being
around homeless people and drug addicts
on the street every day there were a lot
of people in suburbs who want to avoid
that of course they're also issues like
racism and multiculturalism are you
comfortable being around you know people
who don't speak English as their first
language and so no do you want to
retreat to a predominantly white suburb
right in all my years it's not that many
years but in all my years living in City
of Victoria I never saw or spoke to or
interacted with someone who owned a
rifle who went shooting and then the
minute you start up tinder you're you're
all those people and there that's what
they're showing off to you they're
showing it with sometimes you know it's
them also wearing
human clothes but these are the people
who go to the rifle range and where are
those people they're here they're there
they're ever they surround me in in my
daily life and I'm ignoring them and
they're ignoring me i I've never met or
interacted with anyone here who does
paintball hey this if you're not an
english-speaking white Canadian I think
it's fair to say paintball is
stereotypically a bit of a redneck sport
I think the type of people I meet in the
Department of Political Science at my
University in the Department of History
in the Department of Asian Studies they
don't they don't play paintball and they
may do things that are way nerdy or and
dorky or and more void of time I met a
lot of people who watch Japanese
cartoons as adults I met a lot of people
at the University or into Japanese
cartoons and Japanese pornography and
all kinds of stuff oh I don't I don't
think paintball is bad or evil it's just
stereotypically it's associated with a
certain demographic with a certain set
of religious views look let's be real
here in Victoria have I ever met and
spoken to anyone who wanted abortion to
be illegal you know which is now like
the litmus test for the Republican Party
United States or the hard conservatives
in Canada saying I it's not just that it
hasn't come up in conversation I think
really I've never met or interact with
those people and back when I was at the
University of Toronto many years ago you
guys have heard me complain like the
political spectrum of people I encounter
at the University of Toronto went from
left-wing to communist like I didn't
even meet moderate or centered ever
didn't meet or after school but but but
again this is the fundamental thing with
the social sciences if some of those
people were there maybe not
intentionally I was avoiding them and
they weren't avoiding me so you know
when you deal with pollsters deal people
asking questions for polls people doing
serious social science research you
might sometimes be annoyed that they
don't easily give up you know if they've
actually come to your door knocking door
and said look we're here doing a poll
about water quality that's an example
where you know governments and clients
pay big let's say look we want to come
housing tests the tap water and you say
well I can't do it why don't you go test
the guys next door I'm busy whatever
your reason that's and they really say
no like we got to come back well you
know we can't do it next door we have to
and you say well what do you mean you
guys are testing every seventh house or
you know a random number house it's like
no no but you're the random number right
because if you don't if you don't stick
to it if you don't stick to the
randomness then you start getting water
samples that are only from people who
aren't busy right it's oh so you got
water samples but they're all from
people who are retired and who are at
home between 3:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m.
when you were knocking on the door and
they're the type of people who don't
refuse to let you in no you can't let
that bias creep in
we even had a controversy this is when I
was doing social science research in
Cambodia some people like the spin the
stick method of random house selection
where you take a stick and spin it and
say okay we'll go and ask of that house
and it's pointed out no there's bias
because you're more likely to choose
larger houses right if there are small
houses of arche houses right and when
you have upstairs Downstairs situations
well the stick never points at the
second floor it only points at the
gravel with these are these are really
stiff so even I mean randomness is not a
great method of taking a sample as what
you want to do but when you're serious
about these things the social sciences
you always have to challenge like you
know if you're doing research and even
people like well I don't want to
interview people who seem kind of crazy
or seem like they're on drugs or seem
hostile or sounds like no no because if
you refuse to interview this person
refused to include them in the sample
for that reason you know so just say
many years ago I used a different dating
app I don't think I remember the name
it's best probably if I don't even name
the app because I know this function is
change and that app let you search at
that time they let you search the
population for certain keywords so I was
fascinated with this as a social science
research tool so say well I can search
in any location I can search Israel and
look at everyone who lists themselves as
vegan Wow
no like I get a glimpse of what kind of
person says they're vegan on a dating
file in Israel and of course I could
switch that to Los Angeles and switch
that to London England or Germany and
you could you you felt at least you were
seeing certain trends ago okay over here
this kind of person is vegan and over
here this kind of persons began you know
had this kind of fascinating glimpse
into contrasting different cultures in
different ways and okay let's say you
set the search criteria to all of the
United States of America please okay I
want to see people who are both vegan
and Muslim now I want to compare people
who are vegan and Buddhist people who
are vegan and say they speak Chinese
like then you could kind of get this
weird sense of a social science you know
research experiment but as tantalizing
as that is that's the worst possible
example of exactly this sort of bias
we're tight here because I'm only
looking at people who interest me I'm
only asking research questions that I'm
already interested in and even then
beyond that you might have the bias of
you're only paying attention to profiles
where the person is attractive or
there's something about that that
appeals to you right and I mean that's
that's the sort of invisible barrier
that I think tinder really breaks down I
think for many of you even if you're not
single if you're not dating if you're
not looking around I think you'd have to
go through several hundred profiles to
have this experience right you have to
start to account and you'd have to flip
through at least everyone profiles but I
think you like me would think wow these
are the people in my neighborhood like
this is this other side of society not
just one there are many different sides
your society that once in a while and
heard about in the newspaper or on news
on TV like I always knew there were
these people who were against abortion
and owned guns and went to do paintball
people who would proudly put up an image
of themselves decapitating a hog on
their dating ville I am not kidding I
have there were a lot of images of women
slaughtering animals and dismembering
animals they'd killed whether it was
hunted or on a farm and you know fishing
all this stuff these are the outdoor
activities there they're proud of right
okay like every so often I read about
these people in the newspaper
other stuff that comes up too and
obviously the drug epidemic you have
people using coded language and over at
language saying yeah they do drugs and
more drugs they do sing what they're
into and in various ways you get to see
different aspects of the culture that
maybe you knew in theory existed ever
but you get to see it in its most
immediate its most inhuman pardon me
its most human form in the very strange
census that people participate in when
they choose to take a picture of what
they think of as their best life what it
is they're proud of and share it with
the world in the hopes of getting laid
[Music]